RESEARCH ARTICLE

Learning cortical representations through
perturbed and adversarial dreaming
Nicolas Deperrois1*, Mihai A Petrovici1,2, Walter Senn1†, Jakob Jordan1†
1

Department of Physiology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 2Kirchhoff-­Institute
for Physics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract Humans and other animals learn to extract general concepts from sensory experience without extensive teaching. This ability is thought to be facilitated by offline states like sleep
where previous experiences are systemically replayed. However, the characteristic creative nature of
dreams suggests that learning semantic representations may go beyond merely replaying previous
experiences. We support this hypothesis by implementing a cortical architecture inspired by generative adversarial networks (GANs). Learning in our model is organized across three different global
brain states mimicking wakefulness, non-­rapid eye movement (NREM), and REM sleep, optimizing
different, but complementary, objective functions. We train the model on standard datasets of
natural images and evaluate the quality of the learned representations. Our results suggest that
generating new, virtual sensory inputs via adversarial dreaming during REM sleep is essential for
extracting semantic concepts, while replaying episodic memories via perturbed dreaming during
NREM sleep improves the robustness of latent representations. The model provides a new computational perspective on sleep states, memory replay, and dreams, and suggests a cortical implementation of GANs.

*For correspondence:
nicolas.deperrois@unibe.ch
†

These authors shared senior
authorship to this work
Competing interest: The authors
declare that no competing
interests exist.

Editor's evaluation
This paper presents a generative adversarial network-­inspired model of how learning during wakefulness, non-­rapid eye movement (NREM), and REM sleep work together to facilitate the emergence
of object category representations. The model is impressive in its ability to shape representations
based on internally generated activity that does not directly recapitulate prior experience, and has
properties that correspond to replay and dreams in NREM and REM sleep. The model makes predictions that can be tested in sleep experiments in humans and animals.

Funding: See page 23
Preprinted: 09 September 2021
Received: 14 December 2021
Accepted: 07 March 2022
Published: 06 April 2022
Reviewing Editor: Anna
C Schapiro, University of
Pennsylvania, United States
‍ ‍Copyright Deperrois et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.

Introduction
After just a single night of bad sleep, we are acutely aware of the importance of sleep for orderly
body and brain function. In fact, it has become clear that sleep serves multiple crucial physiological
functions (Siegel, 2009; Xie et al., 2013), and growing evidence highlights its impact on cognitive
processes (Walker, 2009). Yet, a lot remains unknown about the precise contribution of sleep, and in
particular dreams, on normal brain function.
One remarkable cognitive ability of humans and other animals lies in the extraction of general
concepts and statistical regularities from sensory experience without extensive teaching (Bergelson
and Swingley, 2012). Such regularities in the sensorium are reflected on the neuronal level in invariant
object-­specific representations in high-­level areas of the visual cortex (Grill-­Spector et al., 2001;
Hung et al., 2005; DiCarlo et al., 2012) on which downstreams areas can operate. These so-­called
semantic representations are progressively constructed and enriched over an organism’s lifetime

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



1 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

(Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Yee et al., 2013), and their emergence is hypothesized to be facilitated by
offline states such as sleep (Dudai et al., 2015).
Previously, several cortical models have been proposed to explain how offline states could
contribute to the emergence of high-­level, semantic representations. Stochastic hierarchical models
that learn to maximize the likelihood of observed data under a generative model such as the Helmholtz machine (Dayan et al., 1995) and the closely related Wake–Sleep algorithm (Hinton et al.,
1995; Bornschein and Bengio, 2015) have demonstrated the potential of combining online and
offline states to learn semantic representations. However, these models do not leverage offline states
to improve their generative model but are explicitly trained to reproduce sensory inputs during wakefulness. In contrast, most dreams during REM sleep exhibit realistic imagery beyond past sensory
experience (Fosse et al., 2003; Nir and Tononi, 2010; Wamsley, 2014), suggesting learning principles that go beyond mere reconstructions.
In parallel, cognitive models inspired by psychological studies of sleep proposed a ‘trace transformation theory’ where semantic knowledge is actively extracted in the cortex from replayed hippocampal episodic memories (Nadel and Moscovitch, 1997; Winocur et al., 2010; Lewis and Durrant,
2011). However, these models lack a mechanistic implementation compatible with cortical structures
and only consider the replay of waking activity during sleep.
Recently, implicit generative models that do not explicitly try to reconstruct observed sensory
inputs, and in particular generative adversarial networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al., 2014), have been
successfully applied in machine learning to generate new but realistic data from random patterns. This
ability has been shown to be accompanied by the learning of disentangled and semantically meaningful representations (Radford et al., 2015; Donahue et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2021). They thus may
provide computational principles for learning cortical semantic representations during offline states
by generating previously unobserved sensory content as reported from dream experiences.
Most dreams experienced during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep only incorporate fragments of
previous waking experience, often intermingled with past memories (Schwartz, 2003). Surprisingly,
such random combinations of memory fragments often result in visual experiences that are perceived
as highly structured and realistic by the dreamer. The striking similarity between the inner world of
dreams and the external world of wakefulness suggests that the brain actively creates novel experiences
by rearranging stored episodic patterns in a meaningful manner (Nir and Tononi, 2010). A few hypothetical functions were attributed to this phenomenon, such as enhancing creative problem solving by
building novel associations between unrelated memory elements (Cai et al., 2009; Llewellyn, 2016;
Lewis et al., 2018), forming internal prospective codes oriented toward future waking experiences
(Llewellyn, 2015), or refining a generative model by minimizing its complexity and improving generalization (Hobson et al., 2014; Hoel, 2021). However, these theories do not consider the role of dreams
for a more basic function, such as the formation of semantic cortical representations.
Here, we propose that dreams, and in particular their creative combination of episodic memories,
play an essential role in forming semantic representations over the course of development. The formation of representations that abstract away redundant information from sensory input and that can
thus be easily used by downstream areas is an important basis for memory semantization. To support
this hypothesis, we introduce a new, functional model of cortical representation learning. The central
ingredient of our model is a creative generative process via feedback from higher to lower cortical
areas that mimics dreaming during REM sleep. This generative process is trained to produce a more
realistic virtual sensory experience in an adversarial fashion by trying to fool an internal mechanism
distinguishing low-­level activities between wakefulness and REM sleep. Intuitively, generating new
but realistic sensory experiences, instead of merely reconstructing previous observations, requires
the brain to understand the composition of its sensorium. In line with transformation theories, this
suggests that cortical representations should carry semantic, decontextualized gist information.
We implement this model in a cortical architecture with hierarchically organized forward and backward pathways, loosely inspired by GANs. The connectivity of the model is adapted by gradient-­
based synaptic plasticity, optimizing different, but complementary objective functions depending on
the brain’s global state. During wakefulness, the model learns to recognize that low-­level activity is
externally driven, stores high-­level representations in the hippocampus, and tries to predict low-­level
from high-­level activity (Figure 1a). During NREM sleep, the model learns to reconstruct replayed
high-­level activity patterns from generated low-­level activity, perturbed by virtual occlusions, referred

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



2 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

a

hippocampus

external?

c

?

internal?

cortex

higher

b

lower

?

NREM

Wake

REM

Figure 1. Cortical representation learning through perturbed and adversarial dreaming (PAD). (a) During wakefulness (Wake), cortical feedforward
pathways learn to recognize that low-­level activity is externally driven and feedback pathways learn to reconstruct it from high-­level neuronal
representations. These high-­level representations are stored in the hippocampus. (b) During non-­rapid eye movement sleep (NREM), feedforward
pathways learn to reconstruct high-­level activity patterns replayed from the hippocampus affected by low-­level perturbations, referred to as perturbed
dreaming. (c) During rapid eye movement sleep (REM), feedforward and feedback pathways operate in an adversarial fashion, referred to as adversarial
dreaming. Feedback pathways generate virtual low-­level activity from combinations of multiple hippocampal memories and spontaneous cortical
activity. While feedforward pathways learn to recognize low-­level activity patterns as internally generated, feedback pathways learn to fool feedforward
pathways.

to as perturbed dreaming (Figure 1b). During REM sleep, the model learns to generate realistic low-­
level activity patterns from random combinations of several hippocampal memories and spontaneous
cortical activity, while simultaneously learning to distinguish these virtual experiences from externally
driven waking experiences, referred to as adversarial dreaming (Figure 1c). Together with the wakefulness, the two sleep states, NREM and REM, jointly implement our model of perturbed and adversarial dreaming (PAD).
Over the course of learning, constrained by its architecture and the prior distribution of latent
activities, our cortical model trained on natural images develops rich latent representations along with
the capacity to generate plausible early sensory activities. We demonstrate that adversarial dreaming
during REM sleep is essential for learning representations organized according to object semantics,
which are improved and robustified by perturbed dreaming during NREM sleep. Together, our results
demonstrate a potential role of dreams and suggest complementary functions of REM and NREM
sleep in cortical representation learning.

Results
Complementary objectives for wakefulness, NREM, and REM sleep
We consider an abstract model of the visual ventral pathway consisting of multiple, hierarchically organized cortical areas, with a feedforward pathway, or encoder, transforming neuronal activities from
lower to higher areas (Figure 2, ‍E ‍). These high-­level activities are compressed representations of low-­
level activities and are called latent representations, here denoted by ‍z.‍ In addition to this feedforward
pathway, we similarly model a feedback pathway, or generator, projecting from higher to lower areas
(Figure 2, ‍G ‍). These two pathways are supported by a simple hippocampal module that can store and
replay latent representations. Three different global brain states are considered: wakefulness (Wake),
non-­REM sleep (NREM), and REM sleep (REM). We focus on the functional role of these phases while
abstracting away dynamic features such as bursts, spindles, or slow waves (Léger et al., 2018), in

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



3 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿



  


  

d

z′ =

z

z


  

   
1
z+ 14 zold+ 12 ϵ
4

d



G

E

G

E

G

E



 

x


=

 

x′





Figure 2. Different objectives during wakefulness, non-­rapid eye movement (NREM), and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep govern the organization of
feedforward and feedback pathways in perturbed and adversarial dreaming (PAD). The variable ‍x‍corresponds to 32 × 32 image, ‍z ‍is a 256-­dimensional
vector representing the latent layer (higher sensory cortex). Encoder (‍E ‍, green) and generator (‍G ‍, blue) networks project bottom-­up and top-­down
signals between lower and higher sensory areas. An oblique arrow (‍↗)‍ indicates that learning occurs in a given pathway. (a) During Wake, low-­level
activities ‍x‍are reconstructed. At the same time, ‍E ‍learns to classify low-­level activity as external (red target ‘external!’) with its output discriminator ‍d ‍.
The obtained latent representations ‍z ‍are stored in the hippocampus. (b) During NREM, the activity ‍z ‍stored during wakefulness is replayed from the
hippocampal memory and regenerates visual input from the previous day perturbed by occlusions, modeled by squares of various sizes applied along
the generated low-­level activity with a certain probability (see Materials and methods). In this phase, ‍E ‍adapts to reproduce the replayed latent activity.
(c) During REM, convex combinations of multiple random hippocampal memories (‍z ‍and ‍zold ‍) and spontaneous cortical activity (‍ϵ‍), here with specific
prefactors, generate a virtual activity in lower areas. While the encoder learns to classify this activity as internal (red target ‘internal!’), the generator
adversarially learns to generate visual inputs that would be classified as external. The red minus on ‍G ‍indicates the inverted plasticity implementing this
adversarial training.

line with previous approaches based on goal-­driven modeling that successfully predict physiological
features along the ventral stream (Yamins et al., 2014; Zhuang et al., 2021).
In our model, the three brain states only differ in their objective function and the presence or
absence of external input. Synaptic plasticity performs stochastic gradient descent on state-­specific
objective functions via error backpropagation (LeCun et al., 2015). We assume that efficient credit
assignment is realized in the cortex and focus on the functional consequences of our specific architecture. For potential implementations of biophysically plausible backpropagation in cortical circuits, we
refer to previous work (e.g., Whittington and Bogacz, 2019; Lillicrap et al., 2020).
During Wake (Figure 2a), sensory inputs evoke activities ‍x‍ in the lower sensory cortex that are
transformed via the feedforward pathway ‍E ‍ into latent representations ‍z ‍ in the higher sensory
cortex. The hippocampal module stores these latent representations, mimicking the formation of
episodic memories. Simultaneously, the feedback pathway ‍G ‍ generates low-­level activities ‍x′ ‍ from
these representations. Synaptic plasticity adapts the encoding and generative pathways (‍E ‍ and ‍G ‍)
to minimize the mismatch between externally driven and internally generated activities (Figure 2a).
Thus, the network learns to reproduce low-­level activity from abstract high-­level representations.
Simultaneously, ‍E ‍ also acts as a ‘discriminator’ with output ‍d ‍ that is trained to become active,
reflecting that the low-­level activity was driven by an external stimuli. The discriminator learning
during Wake is essential to drive adversarial learning during REM. Note that computationally the
classification of low-­level cortical activities into ‘externally driven’ and ‘internally generated’ is not

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



4 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

different from classification into, for example, different object categories, even though conceptually
they serve different purposes. The dual use of ‍E ‍ reflects a view of cortical information processing
in which several network functions are preferentially shared among a single network mimicking the
ventral visual stream (DiCarlo et al., 2012). This approach has been previously successfully employed
in machine learning models (Huang et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2017; Ulyanov et al., 2017; Munjal
et al., 2020; Bang et al., 2020).
For the subsequent sleep phases, the system is disconnected from the external environment, and
activity in the lower sensory cortex is driven by top-­down signals originating from higher areas, as
previously suggested (Nir and Tononi, 2010; Aru et al., 2020). During NREM (Figure 2b), latent
representations ‍z‍are recalled from the hippocampal module, corresponding to the replay of episodic
memories. These representations generate low-­level activities that are perturbed by suppressing
early sensory neurons, modeling the observed differences between replayed and waking activities
(Ji and Wilson, 2007). The encoder reconstructs latent representations from these activity patterns,
and synaptic plasticity adjusts the feedforward pathway to make the latent representation of the
perturbed generated activity similar to the original episodic memory. This process defines perturbed
dreaming.
During REM (Figure 2c), sleep is characterized by creative dreams generating realistic virtual
sensory experiences out of the combination of episodic memories (Fosse et al., 2003; Lewis et al.,
2018). In PAD, multiple random episodic memories from the hippocampal module are linearly
combined and projected to the cortex. Reflecting the decreased coupling (Wierzynski et al., 2009;
Lewis et al., 2018) between hippocampus and cortex during REM sleep, these mixed representations
are diluted with spontaneous cortical activity, here abstracted as Gaussian noise with zero mean and
unit variance. From this new high-­level cortical representation, activity in the lower sensory cortex is
generated and finally passed through the feedforward pathway. Synaptic plasticity adjusts feedforward connections ‍E ‍to silence the activity of the discriminator output as it should learn to distinguish
it from externally evoked sensory activity. Simultaneously, feedback connections are adjusted adversarially to generate activity patterns that appear externally driven and thereby trick the discriminator
into believing that the low-­level activity was externally driven. This is achieved by inverting the sign
of the errors that determine synaptic weight changes in the generative network. This process defines
adversarial dreaming.
The functional differences between our proposed NREM and REM sleep phases are motivated
by experimental data describing a reactivation of hippocampal memories during NREM sleep and
the occurrence of creative dreams during REM sleep. In particular, hippocampal replay has been
reported during NREM sleep within sharp-­wave-­ripples (O’Neill et al., 2010), also observed in the
visual cortex (Ji and Wilson, 2007), which resembles activity from wakefulness. Our REM sleep phase
is built upon cognitive theories of REM dreams (Llewellyn, 2015; Lewis et al., 2018) postulating that
they emerge from random combinations between episodic memory elements, sometimes remote
from each other, which appear realistic for the dreamer. This random coactivation could be caused
by theta oscillations in the hippocampus during REM sleep (Buzsáki, 2002). The addition of cortical
noise is motivated by experimental work showing reduced correlations between hippocampal and
cortical activity during REM sleep (Wierzynski et al., 2009), and the occurrence of ponto-­geniculo-­
occipital (PGO) waves (Nelson et al., 1983) in the visual cortex often associated with the generation
of novel visual imagery in dreams (Hobson et al., 2000; Hobson et al., 2014). Furthermore, the
cortical contribution in REM dreaming is supported by experimental evidence that dreaming still
occurs with hippocampal damage, while reported to be less episodic-­like in nature (Spanò et al.,
2020).
Within our suggested framework, ‘dreams’ arise as early sensory activity that is internally generated via feedback pathways during offline states, and subsequently processed by feedforward pathways. In particular, this implies that besides REM dreams, NREM dreams exist. However, in contrast
to REM dreams, which are significantly different from waking experiences (Fosse et al., 2003), our
model implies that NREM dreams are more similar to waking experiences since they are driven by
single episodic memories, in contrast to REM dreams that are generated from a mixture of episodic
memories. Furthermore, the implementation of adversarial dreaming requires an internal representation of whether early sensory activity is externally or internally generated, that is, a distinction whether
a sensory experience is real or imagined.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



5 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿















  

   

E

G

G

E

 
   

















Figure 3. Both non-­rapid eye movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement (REM) dreams become more realistic over the course of learning.
(a) Examples of sensory inputs observed during wakefulness. Their corresponding latent representations are stored in the hippocampus. (b, c) Single
episodic memories (latent representations of stimuli) during NREM from the previous day and combinations of episodic memories from the two previous
days during REM are recalled from hippocampus and generate early sensory activity via feedback pathways. This activity is shown for early (epoch 1)
and late (epoch 50) training stages of the model. (d) Discrepancy between externally driven and internally generated early sensory activity as measured
by the Fréchet inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2018) during NREM and REM for networks trained on CIFAR-­10 (top) and SVHN (bottom). Lower
distance reflects higher similarity between sensory-­evoked and generated activity. Error bars indicate ±1 SEM over four different initial conditions.

Dreams become more realistic over the course of learning
Dreams in our model arise from both NREM (perturbed dreaming) and REM (adversarial dreaming)
phases. In both cases, they are characterized by activity in early sensory areas generated via feedback
pathways. To illustrate learning in PAD, we consider these low-­level activities during NREM and during
REM for a model with little learning experience (‘early training’) and a model that has experienced
many wake–sleep cycles (‘late training’; Figure 3). A single wake–sleep cycle consists of Wake, NREM,
and REM phases. As an example, we train our model on a dataset of natural images (CIFAR-­10;
Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009) and a dataset of images of house numbers (SVHN; Netzer et al.,
2011). Initially, internally generated low-­level activities during sleep do not share significant similarities with sensory-­evoked activities from Wake (Figure 3a); for example, no obvious object shapes are
represented (Figure 3b). After plasticity has organized network connectivity over many wake–sleep
cycles (50 training epochs), low-­level internally generated activity patterns resemble sensory-­evoked
activity (Figure 3c). NREM-­generated activities reflect the sensory content of the episodic memory
(sensory input from the previous day). REM-­generated activities are different from the sensory activities corresponding to the original episodic memories underlying them as they recombine features of
sensory activities from the two previous days, but still exhibit a realistic structure. This increase in similarity between externally driven and internally generated low-­level activity patterns is also reflected in
a decreasing Fréchet inception distance (Figure 3d), a metric used to quantify the realism of generated images (Heusel et al., 2018). The increase of dreams realism, here mostly driven by a combination of reconstruction learning (Wake) and adversarial learning (Wake and REM), correlates with the
development of dreams in children, which are initially plain and fail to represent objects, people, but
become more realistic and structured over time (Foulkes, 1999; Nir and Tononi, 2010).
The PAD training paradigm hence leads to internally generated low-­level activity patterns that
become more difficult to discern from externally driven activities, whether they originate from single
episodic memories during NREM or from noisy random combinations thereof during REM. We
will next demonstrate that the same learning process leads to the emergence of robust semantic
representations.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



6 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿









      
 


z

 

 

E

G

 

 



x



  

G

E

  



 






Figure 4. Adversarial dreaming during rapid eye movement (REM) improves the linear separability of the latent representation. (a) A linear classifier is
trained on the latent representations ‍z ‍inferred from an external input ‍x‍to predict its associated label (here, the category ‘car’). (b) Training phases and
pathological conditions: full model (perturbed and adversarial dreaming [PAD], black), no REM phase (pink) and PAD with a REM phase using a single
episodic memory only (‘w/o memory mix’, purple). (c, d) Classification accuracy obtained on test datasets (c: CIFAR-­10; d: SVHN) after training the linear
classifier to convergence on the latent space ‍z ‍for each epoch of the ‍E ‍-‍G ‍-­network learning. Full model (PAD): black line; without REM: pink line; with
REM, but without memory mix: purple line. Solid lines represent mean, and shaded areas indicate ±1 SEM over four different initial conditions.

Adversarial dreaming during REM facilitates the emergence of
semantic representations
Semantic knowledge is fundamental for animals to learn quickly, adapt to new environments and
communicate, and is hypothesized to be held by so-­called semantic representations in the cortex
(DiCarlo et al., 2012). An example of such semantic representations are neurons from higher visual
areas that contain linearly separable information about object category, invariant to other factors of
variation, such as background, orientation or pose (Grill-­Spector et al., 2001; Hung et al., 2005;
Majaj et al., 2015).
Here, we demonstrate that PAD, due to the specific combination of plasticity mechanisms during
Wake, NREM, and REM, develops such semantic representations in higher visual areas. Similarly as in
the previous section, we train our model on the CIFAR-­10 and SVHN datasets. To quantify the quality
of inferred latent representations, we measure how easily downstream neurons can read out object
identity from these. For a simple linear readout, its classification accuracy reflects the linear separability of different contents represented in a given dataset. Technically, we train a linear classifier that

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



7 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

distinguishes object categories based on their latent representations ‍z‍ after different numbers of
wake–sleep cycles (‘epochs’, Figure 4a) and report its accuracy on data not used during training of
the model and classifier (‘test data’). While training the classifier, the connectivity of the network (‍E ‍
and ‍G ‍) is fixed.
The latent representation (‍z‍) emerging from the trained network (Figure 4b, PAD) shows increasing
linear separability reaching around 59% test accuracy on CIFAR-­10 (Figure 4c, black line; for details,
see Appendix 1—table 1) and 79% on SVHN (Figure 4d, black line), comparable to less biologically
plausible machine learning models (Berthelot et al., 2018). These results show the ability of PAD to
discover semantic concepts across wake–sleep cycles in an unsupervised fashion.
Within our computational framework, we can easily consider sleep pathologies by directly interfering with the sleep phases. To highlight the importance of REM in learning semantic representations,
we consider a reduced model in which the REM phase with adversarial dreaming is suppressed and
only perturbed dreaming during NREM remains (Figure 4b, pink cross). Without REM sleep, linear
separability increases much slower and even after a large number of epochs remains significantly
below the PAD (see also Appendix 1—figure 3c and d). This suggests that adversarial dreaming
during REM, here modeled by an adversarial game between feedforward and feedback pathways, is
essential for the emergence of easily readable, semantic representations in the cortex. From a computational point of view, this result is in line with previous work showing that learning to generate virtual
inputs via adversarial learning (GANs variants) forms better representations than simply learning to
reproduce external inputs (Radford et al., 2015; Donahue et al., 2016; Berthelot et al., 2018).
Finally, we consider a different pathology in which REM is not driven by randomly combined episodic
memories and noise, but by single episodic memories without noise, as during NREM (Figure 4b,
purple cross). Similarly to removing REM, linear separability increases much slower across epochs,
leading to worse performance of the readout (Figure 4c and d, purple lines). For the SVHN dataset,
the performance does not reach the level of the PAD even after many wake–sleep cycles (see also
Appendix 1—figure 3d). This suggests that combining different, possibly nonrelated episodic memories, together with spontaneous cortical activity, as reported during REM dreaming (Fosse et al.,
2003), leads to significantly faster representation learning.
Our results suggest that generating virtual sensory inputs during REM dreaming, via a high-­level
combination of hippocampal memories and spontaneous cortical activity and subsequent adversarial
learning, allows animals to extract semantic concepts from their sensorium. Our model provides
hypotheses about the effects of REM deprivation, complementing pharmacological and optogenetic
studies reporting impairments in the learning of complex rules and spatial object recognition (Boyce
et al., 2016). For example, our model predicts that object identity would be less easily decodable
from recordings of neuronal activity in the inferior-­temporal (IT) cortex in animal models with chronically impaired REM sleep.

Perturbed dreaming during NREM improves robustness of semantic
representations
Generalizing beyond previously experienced stimuli is essential for an animal’s survival. This generalization is required due to natural perturbations of sensory inputs, for example, partial occlusions,
noise, or varying viewing angles. These alter the stimulation pattern, but in general should not change
its latent representation subsequently used to make decisions.
Here, we model such sensory perturbations by silencing patches of neurons in early sensory areas
during the stimulus presentation (Figure 5a). As before, linear separability is measured via a linear
classifier that has been trained on latent representations of unoccluded images and we use stimuli that
were not used during training. Adding occlusions hence directly tests the out-­of-­distribution generalization capabilities of the learned representations. For the model trained with all phases (Figure 5b,
full model), the linear separability of latent representations decreases as occlusion intensity increases,
until reaching chance level for fully occluded images (Figure 5c and d, black line).
We next consider a sleep pathology in which we suppress perturbed dreaming during the NREM
phase while keeping adversarial dreaming during REM (Figure 5b, orange cross). Without NREM,
linear separability of partially occluded images is significantly decreased for identical occlusion levels
(Figure 5c and d; compare black and orange lines). In particular, performance degrades much faster
with increasing occlusion levels. Note that despite the additional training objective the full PAD

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



8 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿









      
 
 
 

z

G

E

  

E


 

G

 

x



  







 






Figure 5. Perturbed dreaming during non-­rapid eye movement (NREM) improves robustness of latent representations. (a) A trained linear classifier
(Figure 4) infers class labels from latent representations. The classifier was trained on latent representations of original images, but evaluated on
representations of images with varying levels of occlusion. (b) Training phases and pathological conditions: full model (perturbed and adversarial
dreaming [PAD], black), without NREM phase (w/o NREM, orange). (c, d) Classification accuracy obtained on the test dataset (c: CIFAR-­10; d: SVHN)
after 50 epochs for different levels of occlusion (0% to 100%). Full model (PAD): black line; w/o NREM: orange line. SEM over four different initial
conditions overlap with data points. Note that due to an unbalanced distribution of samples the highest performance of a naive classifier is 18.9% for
the SVHN dataset.

develops equally good or even better latent representations of unoccluded images (0% occlusion
intensity) compared to this pathological condition without perturbed dreams.
Crucially, the perturbed dreams in NREM are generated by replaying single episodic memories.
If the latent activity fed to the generator during NREM was of similar origin as during REM, that is,
obtained from a convex combination of multiple episodic memories coupled with cortical spontaneous activity, the quality of the latent representations significantly decreases (see also Appendix 1—
figure 6). This suggests that only replaying single memories, as hypothesized to occur during NREM
sleep (O’Neill et al., 2010), rather than their noisy combination, is beneficial to robustify latent representations against input perturbations.
This robustification originates from the training objective defined in the NREM phase, forcing
feedforward pathways to map perturbed inputs to the latent representation corresponding to their
clean, nonoccluded version. This procedure is reminiscent of a regularization technique from machine

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



9 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿









$"#" 

  
  
  

G


x



 



 


$"#" 


 



#!
#!
"" %

 

E

 

z

Figure 6. Effects of non-­rapid eye movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep on latent representations. (a) Inputs ‍x‍are mapped to
their corresponding latent representations ‍z ‍via the encoder ‍E ‍. Principal component analysis (PCA; Jolliffe and Cadima, 2016) is performed on
the latent space to visualize its structure (b–d). Clustering distances (e, f) are computed directly on latent features ‍z ‍. (b–d) PCA visualization of latent
representations projected on the first two principal components. Full circles represent clean images, open circles represent images with 30% occlusion.
Each color represents an object category from the SVHN dataset (purple: ‘0’; cyan: ‘1’; yellow: ‘2’; red: ‘3’). (e) Ratio between average intra-­class and
average inter-­class distances in latent space for randomly initialized networks (no training, gray), full model (black), model trained without REM sleep
(w/o REM, pink), and model trained without NREM sleep (w/o NREM, orange) for unoccluded inputs. (f) Ratio between average clean-­occluded (30%
occlusion) and average inter-­class distances in latent space for the full model (black), w/o REM (pink), and w/o NREM (orange). Error bars represent SEM
over four different initial conditions.

learning called ‘data augmentation’ (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019), which increases the amount
of training data by adding stochastic perturbations to each input sample. However, in contrast to data
augmentation methods that directly operate on samples, here the system autonomously generates
augmented data in offline states, preventing interference with online cognition and avoiding storage
of the original samples. Our ‘dream augmentation’ suggests that NREM hippocampal replay not only
maintains or strengthens cortical memories, as traditionally suggested (Klinzing et al., 2019), but also
improves latent representations when only partial information is available. For example, our model
predicts that animals lacking such dream augmentation, potentially due to impaired NREM sleep, fail
to react reliably to partially occluded stimuli even though their responses to clean stimuli are accurate.

Latent organization in healthy and pathological models
The results so far demonstrate that PAD, during REM and NREM sleep states, contributes to cortical
representation learning by increasing the linear separability of latent representations into object
classes. We next investigate how the learned latent space is organized, that is, whether representations of sensory inputs with similar semantic content are grouped together even if their low-­level
structure may be quite different, for example, due to different viewing angles, variations among an
object category, or (partial) occlusions.
We illustrate the latent organization by projecting the latent variable ‍z‍ using principal component analysis (PCA, Figure 6a, Jolliffe and Cadima, 2016). This method is well-­suited for visualizing

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



10 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

















!!

!" "



"






"



 
"

!






 

 




!



 






Figure 7. Model features and physiological counterparts during Wake, non-­rapid eye movement (NREM), and
rapid eye movement (REM) phases. ACh: acetylcholine; NA: noradrenaline. ‘Sign switch’ indicates that identical
local errors lead to opposing weight changes between Wake and REM sleep.

high-­dimensional data in a low-­dimensional space while preserving as much of the data’s variation as
possible.
For PAD, the obtained PCA projection shows relatively distinct clusters of latent representations
according to the semantic category (‘class identity’) of their corresponding images (Figure 6b). The
model thus tends to organize latent representations such that high-­level, semantic clusters are discernible. Furthermore, partially occluded objects (Figure 6b, empty circles) are represented close by their
corresponding unoccluded version (Figure 6b, full circles).
As shown in the previous sections, removing either REM or NREM has a negative impact on the
linear separability of sensory inputs. However, the reasons for these effects are different between REM
and NREM. If REM sleep is removed from training, representations of unoccluded images are less
organized according to their semantic category, but still match their corresponding occluded versions
(Figure 6c). REM is thus necessary to organize latent representations into semantic clusters, providing
an easily readable representation for downstream neurons. In contrast, removing NREM causes representations of occluded inputs to be remote from their unoccluded representations (Figure 6d).
We quantify these observations by computing the average distances between latent representations from the same object category (intra-­class distance) and between representations of different
object category (inter-­class distance). Since the absolute distances are difficult to interpret, we focus
on their ratio (Figure 6e). On both datasets, this ratio increases if the REM phase is removed from
training (Figure 6e, compare black and pink bars), reaching levels comparable to the one with the
untrained network. Moreover, removing NREM from training also increases this ratio. These observations suggest that both PAD jointly reorganize the latent space such that stimuli with a similar
semantic structure are mapped to similar latent representations. In addition, we compute the distance
between the latent representations inferred from clean images and their corresponding occluded

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



11 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

versions, also divided by the inter-­class distance (Figure 6f). By removing NREM from training, this
ratio increases significantly, highlighting the importance of NREM in making latent representations
invariant to input perturbations.

Cortical implementation of PAD
We have shown that PAD can learn semantic cortical representations useful for downstream tasks.
Here, we hypothesize how the associated mechanisms may be implemented in the cortex.
First, PAD implies the existence of discriminator neurons that would learn to be differentially
active during wakefulness and REM sleep. It also postulates a conductor that orchestrates learning by
providing a teaching (‘nudging’) signal to the discriminator neurons during Wake and REM. Experimental evidence suggests that discriminator neurons, differentiating between internally generated end
externally driven sensory activity, may reside in the anterior cingulate cortex or the medial prefrontal
cortex, but functionally similar neurons may be located across cortex to deliver local learning signals
(Subramaniam et al., 2012; Simons et al., 2017; Gershman, 2019; Benjamin and Kording, 2021).
Second, learning in PAD is orchestrated across three different phases: (1) learning stimulus reconstruction during Wake, (2) learning latent variable reconstruction during NREM sleep (’perturbed
dreaming’), and (3) learning to generate realistic sensory activity during REM sleep (’adversarial
dreaming’). Our model suggests that objective functions and synaptic plasticity are affected by these
phases (Figure 7). Wakefulness is associated with increased activity of modulatory brainstem neurons
releasing neuromodulators such as acetylcholine (ACh) and noradrenaline (NA), hypothesized to prioritize the amplification of information from external stimuli (Adamantidis et al., 2019; Aru et al.,
2020). In contrast, neuromodulator concentrations during NREM are reduced compared to Wake,
while REM is characterized by high ACh and low NA levels (Hobson, 2009). We postulate that the
state-­specific modulation provides a high activity target for the discriminator during Wake, which is
decreased during REM and entirely gated off during NREM. Furthermore, we suggest that adversarial
learning is implemented by a sign-­switched plasticity in the generative network during REM sleep,
with respect to Wake. During wakefulness, plasticity in these apical synapses may be enhanced by
NA as opposed to NREM (Adamantidis et al., 2019; Aru et al., 2020). The presence of ACh alone
during REM (Hobson et al., 2000) may switch the sign of plasticity in apical synapses of (hippocampal)
pyramidal neurons (McKay et al., 2007). Furthermore, it is known that somato-­dendritic synchrony
is reduced in REM versus NREM sleep (Seibt et al., 2017); this suggests a reduced somato-­dendritic
backpropagation of action potentials, which, in turn, is known to switch the sign of apical plasticity
(Sjöström and Häusser, 2006).
Third, learning in our model requires the computation of reconstruction errors, that is, mismatches
between top-­
down and bottom-­
up activity. So far, two nonexclusive candidates for computing
mismatch signals have been proposed. One suggests a dendritic error representation in layer 5 pyramidal neurons that compare bottom-­up with top-­down inputs from our encoding (‍E ‍) and generative
(‍G ‍) pathways (Guerguiev et al., 2017; Sacramento et al., 2018). The other suggests an explicit
mismatch representation by subclasses of layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons (Keller and Mrsic-­Flogel,
2018).
Fourth, our computational framework assumes effectively separate feedforward and feedback
streams. A functional separation of these streams does not necessarily imply a structural separation at
the network level. Indeed, such cross-­projections are observed in experimental data (Gilbert and Li,
2013) and also used in, for example, the predictive processing framework (Rao and Ballard, 1999).
In our model, an effective separation of the information flows is required to prevent ‘information
shortcuts’ across early sensory cortices that would prevent learning of good representations in higher
sensory areas. This suggests that for significant periods of time intra-­areal lateral interactions between
cortical feedforward and feedback pathways are effectively gated off in most of the areas.
Fifth, similar to previous work (Káli and Dayan, 2004), the hippocampus is not explicitly modeled
but rather mimicked by a buffer allowing simple store and retrieve operations. An extension of
our model could replace this simple mechanism with attractor networks that have been previously
employed to model hippocampal function (Tang et al., 2010). The combination of episodic memories
underlying REM dreams in our model could either occur in the hippocampus or in the cortex. In either
case, we would predict a nearly simultaneous activation of different episodic memories in the hippocampus that results in the generation of creative virtual early cortical activity.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



12 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Finally, beyond the mechanisms discussed above, our model assumes that cortical circuits can
efficiently perform credit assignment, similar to the classical error backpropagation algorithm. Most
biologically plausible implementations for error backpropagation involve feedback connections to
deliver error signals (Whittington and Bogacz, 2019; Richards et al., 2019; Lillicrap et al., 2020),
for example, to the apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons (Sacramento et al., 2018; Guerguiev
et al., 2017; Haider et al., 2021). An implementation of our model in such a framework would hence
require additional feedforward and feedback connections for each neuron. For example, neurons in
the feedforward pathway would not only project to higher cortical areas to transmit signals, but additionally project back to earlier areas to allow these to compute the local errors required for effective
learning. Overall, our proposed model could be mechanistically implemented in cortical networks
through different classes of pyramidal neurons with a biological version of supervised learning based
on a dendritic prediction of somatic activity (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014), and a corresponding global
modulation of synaptic plasticity by state-­specific neuromodulators.

Discussion
Semantic representations in cortical networks emerge in early life despite most observations lacking
an explicit class label, and sleep has been hypothesized to facilitate this process (Klinzing et al.,
2019). However, the role of dreams in cortical representation learning remains unclear. Here, we
proposed that creating virtual sensory experiences by randomly combining episodic memories during
REM sleep lies at the heart of cortical representation learning. Based on a functional cortical architecture, we introduced the PAD model and demonstrated that REM sleep can implement an adversarial learning process that, constrained by the network architecture and the choice of latent prior
distributions, builds semantically organized latent representations. Additionally, perturbed dreaming
based on the episodic memory replay during NREM stabilizes the cortical representations against
sensory perturbations. Our computational framework allowed us to investigate the effects of specific
sleep-­related pathologies on cortical representations. Together, our results demonstrate complementary effects of perturbed dreaming from individual episodes during NREM and adversarial dreaming
from mixed episodes during REM. PAD suggests that the generalization abilities exhibited by humans
and other animals arise from distinct processes during the two sleep phases: REM dreams organize
representations semantically and NREM dreams stabilize these representations against perturbations.
Finally, the model suggests how adversarial learning inspired by GANs can potentially be implemented
by cortical circuits and associated plasticity mechanisms.

Relation to cognitive theories of sleep
PAD focuses on the functional role of sleep, and in particular dreams. Many dynamic features of
brain states during NREM and REM sleep, such as cortical oscillations (Léger et al., 2018), are hence
ignored here but will potentially become relevant when constructing detailed circuit models of the
suggested architectures, for example, for switching between memories (Korcsak-­Gorzo et al., 2021).
Our proposed model of sleep is complementary to theories suggesting that sleep is important for
physiological and cognitive maintenance (McClelland et al., 1995; Káli and Dayan, 2004; RennóCosta et al., 2019; van de Ven et al., 2020). In particular, Norman et al., 2005 proposed a model
where autonomous reactivation of memories (from cortex and hippocampus) coupled with oscillating
inhibition during REM sleep helps detect weak parts of memories and selectively strengthen them
to overcome catastrophic forgetting. While our REM phase serves different purposes, an interesting
commonality is the view of REM as a period where the cortex ‘thinks about what it already knows’
from past and recent memories and reorganizes its representations by replaying them together, as
opposed to NREM where only recent memories are replayed and consolidated. Recent work has also
suggested that the brain learns using adversarial principles either as a reality monitoring mechanism
potentially explaining delusions in some mental disorders (Gershman, 2019), in the context of dreams
to overcome overfitting and promote generalization (Hoel, 2021), or for learning inference in recurrent biological networks (Benjamin and Kording, 2021).
Cognitive theories propose that sleep promotes the abstraction of semantic concepts from
episodic memories through a hippocampo-­
cortical replay of waking experiences, referred to as
‘memory semantization’ (Nadel and Moscovitch, 1997; Lewis and Durrant, 2011). The learning of

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



13 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

organized representations is an important basis for semantization. An extension of our model would
consider the influence of different sensory modalities on representation learning (Guo et al., 2019),
which is known to significantly influence cortical schemas (Lewis et al., 2018) and can encourage the
formation of computationally powerful representations (Radford et al., 2021).
Finally, sleep has previously been considered as a state where ‘noisy’ connections acquired during
wakefulness are selectively forgotten (Crick and Mitchison, 1983; Poe, 2017), or similarly, as a
homeostatic process to desaturate learning and renormalize synaptic strength (synaptic homeostasis
hypothesis; Tononi and Cirelli, 2014; Tononi and Cirelli, 2020). In contrast, our model offers an
additional interpretation of plasticity during sleep, where synapses are globally readapted to satisfy
different but complementary learning objectives than Wake, either by improving feedforward recognition of perturbed inputs (NREM) or by adversarially tuning top-­down generation (REM).

Relation to representation learning models
Recent advances in machine learning, such as self-­supervised learning approaches, have provided
powerful techniques to extract semantic information from complex datasets (Liu et al., 2021). Here,
we mainly took inspiration from self-­
supervised generative models combining autoencoder and
adversarial learning approaches (Radford et al., 2015; Donahue et al., 2016; Dumoulin et al., 2017;
Berthelot et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021). It is theoretically not yet fully understood how linearly
separable representations are learned from objectives that do not explicitly encourage them, that is,
reconstruction and adversarial losses. We hypothesize that the presence of architectural constraints
and latent priors, in combination with our objectives, enables their emergence (see also Alemi et al.,
2018; Tschannen et al., 2020). Note that similar generative machine learning models often report a
higher linear separability of network representations, but use all convolutional layers as a basis for the
readout (Radford et al., 2015; Dumoulin et al., 2017), while we only used low-­dimensional features
‍z.‍ Approaches similar to ours, that is, those that perform classification only on the latent features,
report comparable performance to ours (Berthelot et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2019; Beckham et al.,
2019).
Furthermore, in contrast to previous GAN variants, our model removes many optimization tricks
such as batch normalization layers (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), spectral normalization layers (Miyato
et al., 2018), or optimizing the min-­max GAN objective in three steps with different objectives, which
are challenging to implement in biological substrates. Despite their absence, our model maintains a
high quality of latent representations. As our model is relatively simple, it is amenable to implementations within frameworks approximating backpropagation in the brain (Whittington and Bogacz,
2019; Richards et al., 2019; Lillicrap et al., 2020). However, some components remain challenging
for implementations in biological substrates, for example, convolutional layers (but see Pogodin
et al., 2021) and batched training (but see Marblestone et al., 2016).

Dream augmentations, mixing strategies, and fine-tuning
To make representations robust, a computational strategy consists of learning to map different
sensory inputs containing the same object to the same latent representation, a procedure reminiscent of data augmentation (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). As mentioned above, unlike standard
data augmentation methods, our NREM phase does not require the storage of raw sensory inputs to
create altered inputs necessary for such data augmentation and instead relies on (hippocampal) replay
being able to regenerate similar inputs from high-­level representations stored during wakefulness.
Our results obtained through perturbed dreaming during NREM provide initial evidence that this
dream augmentation may robustify cortical representations.
Furthermore, as discussed above, introducing more specific modifications of the replayed activity,
for example, mimicking translations or rotations of objects, coupled with a negative phase where
latent representations from different images are pushed apart, may further contribute to the formation of invariant representations. Along this line, recent self-­supervised contrastive learning methods
(Gidaris et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021) have been shown to enhance the
semantic structure of latent representations by using a similarity objective where representations of
stimuli under different views are pulled together in a first phase, while, crucially, embedding distances
between unrelated images are increased in a second phase.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



14 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

In our REM phase, different mixing strategies in the latent layer could be considered. For instance,
latent activities could be mixed up by retaining some vector components of a representation and
using the rest from a second one (Beckham et al., 2019). Moreover, more than two memory representations could have been used. Alternatively, our model could be trained with spontaneous cortical
activity only. In our experimental setting, we do not observe significant differences between using
a combination of episodic memories with spontaneous activity or only using spontaneous activity
(Appendix 1—figure 4). However, we hypothesize that for models that learn continuously, a preferential replay of combinations of recent episodic memories encourages the formation of cortical
representations that are useful in the present.
Here, we used a simple linear classifier to measure the quality of latent representations, which is an
obvious simplification with regard to cortical processing. Note, however, that also for more complex
‘readouts’ organized latent representations enable more efficient and faster learning (Silver et al.,
2017; Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). In its current form, PAD assumes
that training the linear readout does not lead to weight changes in the encoder network. However, in
cortical networks, cognitive or motor tasks leveraging latent representations likely shape the encoder
network, which could in our model be reflected in ‘fine-­tuning’ the encoder for specific tasks (compare
Liu et al., 2021).
Finally, our model does not show significant differences in performance when the order of sleep
phases is switched (Appendix 1—figure 5). However, NREM and REM are observed to occur in a
specific order throughout the night (Diekelmann and Born, 2010), and this order has been hypothesized to be important for memory consolidation (‘sequential hypothesis,’ Giuditta et al., 1995). The
independence of phases in our model may be due to the relatively small synaptic changes occurring
in each phase. We expect the order of sleep phases to influence model performance if these changes
become larger either due to longer phases or increased learning rates. The latter may become particularly relevant in continual learning settings where it becomes important to control the emphasis put
on recent observations.

Signatures of generative learning
PAD makes several experimentally testable predictions at the neuronal and systems level. We first
address generally whether the brain learns via generative models during sleep before discussing
specific signatures of adversarial learning.
First, our NREM phase assumes that hippocampal replay generates perturbed wake-­like early
sensory activity (see also Ji and Wilson, 2007), which is subsequently processed by feedforward pathways. Moreover, our model predicts that over the course of learning sensory-­evoked neuronal activity
and internally generated activity during sleep become more similar. In particular, we predict that
(spatial) activity in both NREM and REM become more similar to Wake; however, patterns observed
during REM remain distinctly different due to the creative combination of episodic memories. Future
experimental studies could confirm these hypotheses by recording early sensory activity during wakefulness, NREM, and REM sleep at different developmental stages and evaluating commonalities and
differences between activity patterns. Previous work has already demonstrated increasing similarity
between stimulus-­evoked and spontaneous (generated) activity patterns during wakefulness in the
ferret visual cortex (Berkes et al., 2011; but see Avitan et al., 2021).
On a behavioral level, the improvement of internally generated activity patterns correlates with
the development of dreams in children, which are initially unstructured, simple, and plain, and
gradually become full-­fledged, meaningful, narrative, implicating known characters and reflecting
life episodes (Nir and Tononi, 2010). In spite of their increase in realism, REM dreams in adulthood
are still reported as bizarre (Williams et al., 1992). Bizarre dreams, such as ‘flying dogs,’ are typically defined as discontinuities or incongruities of the sensory experience (Mamelak and Hobson,
1989) rather than completely structureless experiences. This definition hence focuses on high-­level
logical structure, not on the low-­level sensory content. In contrast, the low FID score, that is, high
realism, of REM dreams in our experiments reflects that the low-­level structure on which this evaluation metric mainly focuses (e.g., Brendel and Bethge, 2019) is similar to actual sensory input.
Capturing the ‘logical realism’ of our generated neuronal activities most likely requires a more
sophisticated evaluation metric and an extension of the model capable of generating temporal
sequences of sensory stimulation. We note, however, that even such surreal dreams as ‘flying dogs’

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



15 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

can be interpreted as altered combinations of episodic memories and thus, in principle, can arise
from our model.
Second, our model suggests that the development of semantic representations is mainly driven
by REM sleep. This allows us to make predictions that connect the network with the systems level, in
the specific case of acquiring skills from complex and unfamiliar sensory input. For humans, this could
be learning a foreign language with unfamiliar phonetics. Initially, cortical representations cannot
reflect relevant nuances in these sounds. Phonetic representations develop gradually over experience
and are reflected in changes of the sensory-­evoked latent activity, specifically in the reallocation of
neuronal resources to represent the relevant latent dimensions. We hypothesize that in the case of
impaired REM sleep this change of latent representations is significantly reduced, which goes hand
in hand with decreased learning speed. Future experimental studies could investigate these effects,
for instance, by trying to decode sound identity from high-­level cortical areas in patients where REM
sleep is impaired over long periods through pharmacological agents such as antidepressants (Boyce
et al., 2017). An equivalent task in the nonhuman animal domain would be song acquisition in songbirds (Fiete et al., 2007). On a neuronal level, one could selectively silence feedback pathways during
REM sleep in animal models over many nights, for example, via optogenetic tools. Our model predicts
that this silencing would significantly impact the animal’s learning speed, as reported from animals
with reduced theta rhythm during REM sleep (Boyce et al., 2017).

Signatures of adversarial learning
The experimental predictions discussed above mainly address whether the brain learns via generative
models during sleep. Here, we make experimental predictions that would support our hypotheses and
contrast them to alternative theories of learning during offline states.

Existence of an external/internal discriminator
The discriminator provides our model with the ability to distinguish externally driven from internally
generated low-­level cortical activity. Due to this unique property, the discriminator may be leveraged
to distinguish actual from imagined sensations. According to our model, reduced REM sleep would
lead to an impaired discriminator, and could thus result in an inability of subjects to realize that self-­
generated imagery is not part of the external sensorium. This may result in the formation of delusions,
as previously suggested (Gershman, 2019). For instance, hallucinations in schizophrenic patients,
often mistaken for veridical perceptions (Waters et al., 2016), could be partially caused by abnormal
REM sleep patterns, related to observed reduced REM latency and density (Cohrs, 2008). Based on
these observations, we predict in the context of our model a negative correlation between REM sleep
quality and delusional perceptions of hallucinations. Systematic differences in REM sleep quality may
hence explain why some patients are able to recognize that their hallucinations are self-­generated
while some others mistake them to be real. Moreover, although locating discriminator neurons may
prove nontrivial (but see ‘Cortical implementation of PAD’ for specific suggestions), we predict that
once the relevant cells have been identified, perturbing them may lead to detrimental effects on
differentiating between external sensory inputs and internally generated percepts.
The state-­specific activity of the discriminator population makes predictions about plasticity on
synapses in the feedforward stream during wakefulness and sleep. In our model, the discriminator
is trained to distinguish externally from internally generated patterns by opposed targets imposed
during Wake and REM. After many wake–sleep cycles, the KL loss as well as the reconstruction loss (see
Materials and methods) in our model become small compared to the adversarial loss (Appendix 1—
figure 1, Appendix 1—figure 2), which remains nonzero due to a balance between discriminator and
generator. The same low-­level activity pattern would hence cause opposite weight changes during
wakefulness and sleep on feedforward synapses. This could be tested experimentally by actively
instantiating similar spatial activity patterns in low-­level sensory cortex during wakefulness and REM
and comparing the statistics of observed changes in (feedforward) downstream synapses.

Adversarial training of a generator during sleep
To drive adversarial learning and maintain a balance between the generator and discriminator,
the generative network must be trained in parallel to the discriminative (encoder) network during
REM. In contrast, in alternative representation learning models that involve offline states such as the

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



16 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Wake–Sleep algorithm (Hinton et al., 1995), generative pathways are not trained to produce realistic
dreams during the sleep phase. Rather, they are trained by reconstruction on real input data during
the wake phase. This allows an experimental distinction between our model and Wake–Sleep-­like
models: while our model predicts plasticity in both bottom-­up and top-­down pathways both during
wake and during REM sleep, Wake–Sleep models alternate between training feedback and feedforward connections during online and offline states, respectively.
Previous work has developed methods to infer plasticity rules from neuronal activity (Lim et al.,
2015; Senn and Sacramento, 2015) or weight changes (Nayebi et al., 2020). In the spirit of existing
in vivo experiments, we suggest to optogenetically monitor and potentially modulate apical dendritic
activities in cortical pyramidal neurons of mice during wakefulness and REM sleep (Li et al., 2017;
Voigts and Harnett, 2020; Schoenfeld et al., 2022). From the statistics of the recorded dendritic
and neuronal activity, the plasticity rules could be inferred and compared to the state-­dependent rules
suggested by our model, particularly to the predicted sign switch of plasticity between wakefulness
and REM sleep.

Adversarial learning and creativity
Adversarial learning, for example, in GANs, enables a form of creativity, reflected in their ability
to generate realistic new data or to create semantically meaningful interpolations (Radford et al.,
2015; Berthelot et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2018). This creativity might be partly caused by the
freedom in generating sensory activity that is not restricted by requiring good reconstructions, but
is only guided by the internal/external judgment (Goodfellow, 2016). This is less constraining on
the generator than direct reconstruction losses used in alternative models such as variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2013) or the Wake–Sleep algorithm (Hinton et al., 1995). We thus
predict that REM sleep, here implementing adversarial learning, should boost creativity, as previously reported (Cai et al., 2009; Llewellyn, 2016; Lewis et al., 2018). Furthermore, we predict that
REM sleep influences a subject’s ability to visualize creative mental images, for instance, associating
nonobvious visual patterns with distinct memories. For example, we predict that participants chronically lacking REM sleep would perform worse than control participants at a creative synthesis task
(Palmiero et al., 2015), consisting of combining different visual components into a new, potentially
useful object.

Adversarial learning and lucid dreaming
Finally, adversarial dreaming offers a theoretical framework to investigate neuronal correlates of
normal versus lucid dreaming (Dresler et al., 2012; Baird et al., 2019). While in normal dreaming
the internally generated activity is perceived as externally caused, in lucid dreaming it is perceived
as what it is, that is, internally generated. We hypothesize that the ‘neuronal conductor’ that orchestrates adversarial dreaming is also involved in lucid dreaming by providing to the dreamer conscious
access to the target ‘internal’ that the conductor imposes during REM sleep. Our cortical implementation suggests that the neuronal conductor could gate the discriminator teaching via the apical
activity of cortical pyramidal neurons. The same apical dendrites were also speculated to be involved
in conscious perception (Takahashi et al., 2020), dreaming (Aru et al., 2020), and in representing the
state and content of consciousness (Aru et al., 2019).
Our model demonstrates that adversarial learning during wakefulness and sleep can provide significant benefits to extract semantic concepts from sensory experience. By bringing insights from modern
artificial intelligence to cognitive theories of sleep function, we suggest that cortical representation
learning during dreaming is a creative process, orchestrated by brain-­state-­regulated adversarial
games between separated feedforward and feedback streams. Adversarial dreaming may further be
helpful to understand learning beyond the standard student–teacher paradigm. By ‘seeing’ the world
from new perspectives every night, dreaming represents an active learning phenomenon, constantly
improving our understanding, our creativity, and our awareness.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



17 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Ed







x

d

E














Ez

z


G

Figure 8. Convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture of encoder/discriminator and generator used in
perturbed and adversarial dreaming (PAD).

Materials and methods
Network architecture
The network consists of two separate pathways, mapping from the pixel to the latent space (‘encoder’/‘discriminator’) and from the latent to pixel space (‘generator’). Encoder/discriminator and
generator architectures follow a similar structure as the Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial
Networks (DCGANs) model (Radford et al., 2015). The encoder ‍Ez ‍ has four convolutional layers
(LeCun et al., 2015) containing 64, 128, 256, and 256 channels, respectively (Figure 8).
Each layer uses a 4 × 4 kernel, a padding of 1 (0 for last layer), and a stride of 2, that is, feature size
is halved in each layer. All convolutional layers except the last one are followed by a LeakyReLU nonlinearity (Maas et al., 2013). We denote the activity in the last convolutional layer as ‍z‍. An additional
convolutional layer followed by a sigmoid nonlinearity is added on top of the second-­to-­last layer of
the encoder and maps to a single scalar value ‍d ‍, the internal/external discrimination (with putative
teaching signal 0 or 1). We denote the mapping from ‍x‍to ‍d ‍by ‍Ed .‍ ‍Ez ‍and ‍Ed ‍thus share the first three
convolutional layers. We jointly denote them by ‍E ‍, where ‍E(x) = (Ez (x), Ed (x)) = (z, d)‍(Figure 8).
Mirroring the structure of ‍Ez ,‍ the generator ‍G ‍has four deconvolutional layers containing 256, 128,
64, and 3 channels. They all use a 4 × 4 kernel, a padding of 1 (0 for first deconvolutional layer), and a
stride of 2, that is, the feature size is doubled in each layer. The first three deconvolutional layers are
followed by a LeakyReLU nonlinearity, and the last one by a tanh nonlinearity.
As a detailed hippocampus model is outside the scope of this study, we mimic hippocampal storage
and retrieval by storing and reading latent representations to and from memory.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



18 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Datasets
We use the CIFAR-­10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009) and SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011) datasets to
evaluate our model. They consist of 32 × 32 pixel images with three color channels. We consider their
usual split into a training set and a smaller test set.

Training procedure
We train our model by performing stochastic gradient descent with mini-­batches on condition-­specific
objective functions, in the following also referred to as loss functions, using the ADAM optimizer
(‍β1 = 0.5‍, ‍β2 = 0.999‍; Kingma and Ba, 2017) with a learning rate of 0.0002 and mini-­batch size of 64.
We rely on our model being fully differentiable. The following section describes the loss functions for
the respective conditions.
Algorithm 1: Training procedure
‍θE , θG ;‍

//initialize network parameters

for number of training iterations do
  
Wake 

(1)
(b)
  
‍X ← {x , ..., x }‍
  
‍Z, D ← E(X)‍

//random mini-­batch from dataset
//infer latent and discriminative outputs

‍X′ ← G(Z)‍

//reconstruct input via generator

(i)
′ (i) 2 
1 ∑b
  
i=1 ∥x − x ∥ ‍
‍Limg ← b
  
‍LKL ← DKL (q(Z)||p(Z))‍

∑b

1
  
‍Lreal ← − b

i=1 log(d

//compute reconstruction loss
//compute KL-­loss

(i) 

)‍

//compute discriminator loss on real samples

  
‍θE ← θE − ∇θE (Limg + LKL + Lreal )‍

//update encoder/discriminator parameters

  
‍θG ← θG − ∇θG Limg ‍

//update generator parameters

  
NREM sleep

(1)
(b)
  
‍Z ← {z , ..., z }‍
  ′
‍X

′

//mini-­batch of latent vectors from Wake

← G(Z)‍

//reconstruct input via generator

← Ez (X′ ⊙ Ω)‍
(i)
′(i) 2
1 ∑b
  
i=1 ∥z − z ∥ ‍
‍LNREM ← b
  
‍Z

//infer perturbed input>
//compute reconstruction loss

  
‍θE ← θE − ∇θE LNREM ‍
  
REM sleep
  
if first iteration then

Zmix ← Z‍
   
‍
  
else
′
′
   
‍Zmix ← λ (λZ + (1 − λ)Zold ) + (1 − λ )ϵ‍

//convex combination of current and old latent vectors with noise

  
end

  
‍D ← Ed (G(Zmix ))‍

1 ∑b
i=1 log

  
LREM ← − b
‍

  
‍θE ← θE − ∇θE LREM ‍

(

)
1 − d(i) 

//compute adversarial loss

‍

  
‍θG ← θG + ∇θG LREM ‍
  
‍Zold ← Z ‍

//gradient ascent on discriminator loss
//keep current vectors for next iteration

end

Loss functions
Wake
In the Wake condition, we minimize the following objective function, composed of a loss for image
encoding, a regularization, and a real/fake (external/internal) discriminator,
	﻿‍

LWake = Limg + LKL + Lreal .‍

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384

(1)



19 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

(1) (2)
(b)
‍Ez ‍and ‍G ‍ learn to reconstruct the mini-­batch of images ‍X = {x , x , ..., x }‍ similarly to autoencoders (Bengio et al., 2013) by minimizing the image reconstruction loss ‍Limg‍defined by
b
1 ∑ (i)
Limg =
∥ x − G(Ez (x(i) )) ∥2 ,
b
i=1
	﻿‍
‍
(2)

where ‍b‍denotes the size of the mini-­batch. We store the latent vectors ‍Z = Ez (X)‍corresponding to
the current mini-­batch for usage during the NREM and REM phases.
We additionally impose a Kullback–Leibler divergence loss on the encoder ‍Ez ‍. This acts as a regularizer and encourages latent activities to be Gaussian with zero mean and unit variance:
LKL = DKL (q(Z | X) ∥ p(Z)) ,‍

	﻿‍

(3)

where ‍q(Z|X) ∼ N (µ, σ 2 )‍is a distribution over the latent variables ‍Z‍, parameterized by mean µ and
standard deviation ‍σ ‍, and ‍p(Z) ∼ N (0, 1)‍is the prior distribution over latent variables. ‍Ez ‍is trained to
minimize the following loss:
LKL =

	﻿‍

)
nz (
2
1 ∑
(Z) 2
(Z) 2
µ(Z)
+
σ
−
1
−
log
(σ
)
,
j
j
j
2nz
j=1
‍

(4)

(Z)
th
where nz denotes the dimension of the latent space and where ‍µ(Z)
j ‍ and ‍σj ‍ represent the ‍j ‍
(Z)
(Z)
elements of respectively the empirical mean ‍µ ‍ and empirical standard deviation ‍σ ‍ of the set of
latent vectors ‍Ez (X) = Z.‍
As part of the adversarial game, ‍Ed ‍is trained to classify the mini-­batch of images as real. This corresponds to minimizing the loss defined as sum across the mini-­batch size ‍b‍,

Lreal = LGAN (Ed (X), 1) = −

	﻿‍

b

1∑
log(Ed (x(i) )) .
b
i=1
‍

(5)

Note that, in principle, ‍LGAN ‍ can be any GAN-­specific loss function (Gui et al., 2020). Here, we
choose the binary cross-­entropy loss.

NREM sleep
Each Wake phase is followed by an NREM phase. During this phase, we make use of the mini-­batch
of latent vectors ‍z‍ stored during the Wake phase. Starting from a mini-­batch of latent vectors, we
generate images ‍G(z)‍. Each obtained image of ‍G(z)‍is multiplied by a binary occlusion mask ‍ω‍of the
same dimension. This mask is generated by randomly picking two occlusion parameters, occlusion
intensity and square size (for details, see section ‘Image occlusion’). The encoder ‍Ez ‍learns to reconstruct the latent vectors ‍z‍by minimizing the following reconstruction loss:
LNREM =

	﻿‍

b

(
)
1 ∑ (i)
∥ z − Ez G(z(i) ) ⊙ ω ∥2 ,
b
i=1
‍

(6)

where ‍⊙‍denotes the element-­wise product.

REM sleep
In REM, each latent vector from the mini-­
batch considered during Wake is combined with the
latent vector from the previous mini-­batch, the whole being convex combined with a mini-­batch of
noise vectors ‍ϵ ∼ N (0, I)‍, where ‍I ‍ is the identity matrix, leading to a mini-­batch of latent vectors
′
′
′
‍Zmix = λ (λZ + (1 − λ)Zold ) + (1 − λ )ϵ‍. Here, ‍λ = 0.5‍and ‍λ = 0.5‍, where ‍Zold ‍is the previous mini-­batch
of latent activities. This batch of latent vectors is passed through ‍G ‍to generate the associated images
‍G(Zmix )‍. In this phase, the loss function encourages ‍Ed ‍ to classify ‍G(Zmix )‍ as fake, while adversarially
pushing ‍G ‍to generate images that are less likely to be classified as fake by the minimax objective
min max LREM ,
Ed
G
‍

	﻿‍

(7)

where

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



20 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿







Figure 9. Varying size and intensity of occlusions on example images from CIFAR-­10. Image occlusions vary along
two parameters: occlusion intensity, defined by the probability to apply a gray square at a given position, and
square size (s).

	﻿‍

LREM = LGAN (Ed (G(Zλ )), 0) = −

b

(
( (
)))
1∑
log 1 − Ed G zλ (i)
.
b
i=1
‍

(8)

In our model, the adversarial process is simply described by a full backpropagation of error through
‍Ed ‍and ‍G ‍with a sign switch of weight changes in ‍G ‍.
In summary, each Wake–NREM–REM cycle consists of (1) reconstructing a mini-­batch ‍x‍of images
during Wake, (2) reconstructing a mini-­batch of latent activities ‍Z = Ez (X)‍during NREM with perturbation of ‍G(z)‍, and (3) replaying ‍Z‍convex combined with ‍Zold ‍and noise from the ‍(n − 1)‍th cycle. In PAD
training, all losses are weighted equally and we did not use a schedule for ‍LKL ‍, as opposed to standard variational autoencoder training (Kingma and Welling, 2013). One training epoch is defined by
the number of mini-­batches necessary to cover the whole dataset. The evolution of losses with training
epochs is shown in Appendix 1—figure 1 and Appendix 1—figure 2. The whole training procedure
is summarized in the pseudo-­code implemented in the section ‘Algorithm 1:Training procedure’.

Image occlusion
Following previous work (Zeiler and Fergus, 2013), gray squares of various sizes are applied along
the image with a certain probability (Figure 9). For each mini-­batch, a probability and square size were
randomly picked between 0 and 1, and 1–8, respectively. We divide the image into patches of the
given size and replace each patch with a constant value (here, 0) according to the defined probability.

Evaluation
Training of linear readout

A linear classifier is trained on top of latent features ‍Z = Ez (X),‍ with ‍Z ∈ RN×256‍, where ‍N ‍is the number
of training dataset images. A latent feature ‍z ∈ R256‍ is projected via a weight matrix W
‍ ∈ R10×256‍ to
the label neurons to obtain the vector ‍y = Wz.‍
This weight matrix is trained in a supervised fashion by using a multiclass cross-­entropy loss. For a
feature ‍z‍labeled with a target class ‍t ∈ {0, 1, .., 9},‍ the per-­sample classification loss is given by
	﻿‍

LC (z, t; W) = − log pW (Y = t | z) .‍

(9)

Here, ‍pW ‍ is the conditional probability of the classifier defined by the linear projection and the
softmax function

	﻿‍

eyt
pW (Y = t | z) = ∑9

yi
i=0 e

.
‍

(10)

The classifier is trained by mini-­batch (‍b = 64‍) stochastic gradient descent on the loss ‍LC ‍ with a
learning rate ‍η = 0.2‍for 20 epochs using the whole training dataset.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



21 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Linear separability
Following previous work (Hjelm et al., 2019), we define linear separability as the classification accuracy of the trained classifier on inferred latent activities ‍Ez (Xtest )‍ from a separate test dataset ‍Xtest .‍
Given a latent feature ‍z‍, class prediction is made by picking the index of the maximal activity in the
vector ‍y.‍ We ran several simulations for four different initial parameters of ‍E ‍ and ‍G ‍ and report the
average test accuracy and standard error of the mean (SEM) over trials. To evaluate performance
on occluded data, we applied random square occlusion masks on each sample from ‍Xtest ‍ for a fixed
probability of occlusion and square size. We report only results for occlusions of size 4, after observing
similar results with other square sizes.

PCA visualization

To visualize the 256-­dimensional latent representation ‍Ez (x)‍ of the trained model, we used the PCA
reduction algorithm (Jolliffe and Cadima, 2016). We project the latent representations to the first two
principal components.

Latent space organization metrics
Intra-­
class distance is computed by randomly picking 1000 pairs of images of the same class,
projecting them to the encoder latent space ‍z‍and computing their Euclidean distance. This process
is repeated over the 10 classes in order to obtain the average over 10 classes. Similarly, inter-­class
distance is computed by randomly picking 10,000 pairs of images of different classes, projecting them
to the encoder latent space ‍z‍ and computing their Euclidean distance. The ratio of intra- and inter-­
class distance is obtained by dividing the mean intra-­class distance by the mean inter-­class distance.
Clean-­occluded distance is computed by randomly picking 10,000 pairs of nonoccluded/occluded
images, projecting them to the encoder latent space, and computing their Euclidean distance. The
ratio of clean-­occluded and inter-­class distance is obtained by dividing the clean-­occluded distance by
the mean inter-­class distance. We performed this analysis for several different trained networks with
different initial conditions and report the mean ratios and SEM over trials.

Fréchet inception distance
Following Heusel et al., 2018, FID is computed by comparing the statistics of generated (NREM or
REM) samples to real images from the training dataset projected through an Inception v3 network
pre-­trained on ImageNet
	﻿‍

FID = ∥µreal − µgen ∥2 + Tr(Σreal + Σgen − 2(Σreal Σgen )1/2 )‍

(11)

where µ and Σ
‍ ‍represent the empirical mean and covariance of the 2048-­dimensional activations of
the Inception v3 pool3 layer for 10,000 pairs of data samples and generated images. Results represent
mean FID and SEM FID over four different trained networks with different initializations.

Modifications specific to pathological models
To evaluate the differential effects of each phase, we removed NREM and/or REM phases from training
(Figures 4–6). For instance, for the condition w/o NREM, the network is never trained with NREM.
A few adjustments were empirically observed to be necessary in order to obtain a fair comparison
between each condition. When removing the REM phase during training, we observed a decrease of
linear separability after some (gt25) epochs. We suspect that this decrease is a result of overfitting due
to unconstrained autoencoding objective of ‍E ‍and ‍G ‍. Models trained without REM hence would not
provide a good baseline to reveal the effect of adversarial dreaming on linear separability. For models
without the REM phase, we hence added a vector of Gaussian noise ‍ϵ ∼ N (0, 0.5 · I)‍to the encoded
activities ‍Ez (X)‍of dimension nz before feeding them to the generator. Thus, Equation 2 becomes

	﻿‍

Limg =

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384

b
(
)
1 ∑ (i)
∥ x − G Ez (x(i) ) + ϵ ∥2 ,
b
i=1
‍

(12)



22 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

which stabilizes linear separability of latent activities around its maximal value for both CIFAR-­10
and SVHN datasets until the end of training.
Furthermore, we observed that the NREM phase alters linear performance in the absence of REM
(w/o REM condition). To overcome this issue, we reduced the effect of NREM by scaling down its loss
with a factor of 0.5. This enabled to benefit from NREM (recognition under image occlusion) without
altering linear separability on full images.

Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the European Union 7th Framework Programme under grant
agreement 604102 (HBP), the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme under grant agreements 720270,
785907, and 945539 (HBP), the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF, Sinergia grant CRSII5-­
180316), the Interfaculty Research Cooperation (IRC) ‘Decoding Sleep’ of the University of Bern, and
the Manfred Stärk Foundation. We thank the IRC collaborators Paolo Favaro for inspiring discussions
on related methods in AI and deep learning, and Antoine Adamantidis and Christoph Nissen for
helpful discussions on REM/NREM sleep phenomena in mice and humans.

Additional information
Funding
Funder

Grant reference number

Author

European Commission

604102

Mihai A Petrovici
Walter Senn
Jakob Jordan

European Commission

720270

Mihai A Petrovici
Walter Senn
Jakob Jordan

European Commission

785907

Mihai A Petrovici
Walter Senn
Jakob Jordan

European Commission

945539

Mihai A Petrovici
Walter Senn
Jakob Jordan

Universität Bern

Interfaculty Research
Cooperation 'Decoding
Sleep'

Nicolas Deperrois
Walter Senn

Universität Heidelberg

Manfred Stärk Foundation Mihai A Petrovici

Swiss National Science
Foundation

Sinergia Grant
CRSII5-180316

Walter Senn

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.

Author contributions
Nicolas Deperrois, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology,
Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing; Mihai A Petrovici, Conceptualization, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review and editing; Walter
Senn, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review and editing, Shared senior authorship; Jakob Jordan, Conceptualization,
Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing
– review and editing, Shared senior authorship

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



23 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Author ORCIDs
Nicolas Deperrois ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7178-1818
Mihai A Petrovici ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2632-0427
Walter Senn ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3622-0497
Jakob Jordan ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3438-5001
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76384.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76384.sa2

Additional files
Supplementary files
• Transparent reporting form
Data availability
The current manuscript is a computational study, so no data have been generated for this manuscript.
Deep learning benchmark datasets (CIFAR-­10 and SVHN) were used for the simulations. We published
all code necessary to repeat our experiments in the following repository: https://github.com/NicoZenith/PAD, (copy archived at swh:1:rev:0a2a4ad4da69f2f8c53fd5ee96e895c72aeb9f26).
The following previously published datasets were used:
Author(s)

Year

Dataset title

Dataset URL

Database and Identifier

Krizhevsky A

2009

CIFAR-­10

https://www.​cs.​
toronto.​edu/~​kriz/​
cifar.​html

Department of Computer
Science, University of
Toronto, ~kriz/cifar

SVHN

http://​ufldl.​stanford.​
edu/​housenumbers/

Computer Science
Department, Stanford
University, housenumbers

Netzer Y, Wang T,
2011
Coates A, Bissacco A,
Wu B, Ng AY

References
Adamantidis AR, Gutierrez Herrera C, Gent TC. 2019. Oscillating circuitries in the sleeping brain. Nature
Reviews. Neuroscience 20:746–762. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-019-0223-4, PMID: 31616106
Alemi AA, Poole B, Fischer I, Dillon JV, Saurous RA, Murphy K. 2018. Fixing a broken elbo. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​
org/​abs/​1711.​00464
Aru J, Suzuki M, Rutiku R, Larkum ME, Bachmann T. 2019. Coupling the State and Contents of Consciousness
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 13:1–9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2019.00043, PMID: 31543762
Aru J, Siclari F, Phillips WA, Storm JF. 2020. Apical drive—A cellular mechanism of dreaming Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews 119:440–455. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.09.018, PMID: 33002561
Avitan L, Pujic Z, Mölter J, Zhu S, Sun B, Goodhill GJ. 2021. Spontaneous and evoked activity patterns diverge
over development eLife 10:e61942. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.61942, PMID: 33871351
Baird B, Mota-­Rolim SA, Dresler M. 2019. The cognitive neuroscience of lucid dreaming Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 100:305–323. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.03.008, PMID: 30880167
Bang D, Kang S, Shim H. 2020. Discriminator feature-­based inference by recycling the discriminator of gans
International Journal of Computer Vision 128:2436–2458. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01311-4
Beckham C, Honari S, Verma V, Lamb AM, Ghadiri F, Hjelm RD, Bengio Y, Pal C. 2019. On Adversarial Mixup
Resynthesis. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1903.​02709
Bengio Y, Courville A, Vincent P. 2013. Representation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35:1798–1828. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.​
2013.50, PMID: 23787338
Benjamin AS, Kording KP. 2021. Learning to infer in recurrent biological networks [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​
2006.​10811
Bergelson E, Swingley D. 2012. At 6-­9 months, human infants know the meanings of many common nouns.
PNAS 109:3253–3258. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113380109, PMID: 22331874
Berkes P, Orbán G, Lengyel M, Fiser J. 2011. Spontaneous cortical activity reveals hallmarks of an optimal
internal model of the environment Science (New York, N.Y.) 331:83–87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.​
1195870, PMID: 21212356
Berthelot D, Raffel C, Roy A, Goodfellow I. 2018. Understanding and Improving Interpolation in Autoencoders
via an Adversarial Regularizer [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1807.​07543

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



24 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Bornschein J, Bengio Y. 2015. Reweighted wake-­sleep [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1406.​2751
Boyce R, Glasgow SD, Williams S, Adamantidis A. 2016. Causal evidence for the role of rem sleep theta rhythm
in contextual memory consolidation Science (New York, N.Y.) 352:812–816. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/​
science.aad5252, PMID: 27174984
Boyce R, Williams S, Adamantidis A. 2017. REM sleep and memory Current Opinion in Neurobiology 44:167–
177. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2017.05.001, PMID: 28544929
Brendel W, Bethge M. 2019. Approximating cnns with bag-­of-­local-­features models works surprisingly well on
imagenet [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1904.​00760
Brock A, Lim T, Ritchie JM, Weston N. 2017. Neural Photo Editing with Introspective Adversarial Networks
[arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1609.​07093
Buzsáki G. 2002. Theta Oscillations in the Hippocampus Neuron 33:325–340. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/​
s0896-6273(02)00586-x, PMID: 11832222
Cai DJ, Mednick SA, Harrison EM, Kanady JC, Mednick SC. 2009. REM, not incubation, improves creativity by
priming associative networks. PNAS 106:10130–10134. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900271106, PMID:
19506253
Chen T, Kornblith S, Norouzi M, Hinton G. 2020. A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual
Representations [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2002.​05709
Cohrs S. 2008. Sleep Disturbances in Patients with Schizophrenia CNS Drugs 22:939–962. DOI: https://doi.org/​
10.2165/00023210-200822110-00004, PMID: 18840034
Crick F, Mitchison G. 1983. The function of dream sleep Nature 304:111–114. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/​
304111a0, PMID: 6866101
Dayan P, Hinton GE, Neal RM, Zemel RS. 1995. The Helmholtz Machine Neural Computation 7:889–904. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889, PMID: 7584891
DiCarlo JJ, Zoccolan D, Rust NC. 2012. How Does the Brain Solve Visual Object Recognition Neuron 73:415–
434. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.010, PMID: 22325196
Diekelmann S, Born J. 2010. The memory function of sleep Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 11:114–126. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2762, PMID: 20046194
Donahue J, Krähenbühl P, Darrell T. 2016. Adversarial Feature Learning [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1605.​09782
Dresler M, Wehrle R, Spoormaker VI, Koch SP, Holsboer F, Steiger A, Obrig H, Sämann PG, Czisch M. 2012.
Neural correlates of dream lucidity obtained from contrasting lucid versus non-­lucid REM sleep: A combined
EEG/fMRI case study Sleep 35:1017–1020. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.1974, PMID: 22754049
Dudai Y, Karni A, Born J. 2015. The Consolidation and Transformation of Memory Neuron 88:20–32. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.004, PMID: 26447570
Dumoulin V, Belghazi I, Poole B, Mastropietro O, Lamb A, Arjovsky M, Courville A. 2017. Adversarially Learned
Inference [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1606.​00704
Fiete IR, Fee MS, Seung HS. 2007. Model of birdsong learning based on gradient estimation by dynamic
perturbation of neural conductances Journal of Neurophysiology 98:2038–2057. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/​
jn.01311.2006, PMID: 17652414
Fosse MJ, Fosse R, Hobson JA, Stickgold RJ. 2003. Dreaming and episodic memory: A functional dissociation
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 15:1–9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1162/089892903321107774, PMID:
12590838
Foulkes D. 1999. Children’s Dreaming and the Development of Consciousness. Harvard University Press. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674037168
Gershman SJ. 2019. The Generative Adversarial Brain. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 2:18. DOI: https://doi.​
org/10.3389/frai.2019.00018, PMID: 33733107
Gidaris S, Singh P, Komodakis N. 2018. Unsupervised Representation Learning by Predicting Image Rotations
[arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1803.​07728
Gilbert CD, Li W. 2013. Top-­down influences on visual processing Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 14:350–363.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3476, PMID: 23595013
Giuditta A, Ambrosini MV, Montagnese P, Mandile P, Cotugno M, Grassi Zucconi G, Vescia S. 1995. The
sequential hypothesis of the function of sleep Behavioural Brain Research 69:157–166. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
1016/0166-4328(95)00012-i, PMID: 7546307
Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-­Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-­Farley D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y. 2014.
Generative adversarial networks. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1406.​2661
Goodfellow I. 2016. NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1701.​
00160
Grill-­Spector K, Kourtzi Z, Kanwisher N. 2001. The lateral occipital complex and its role in object recognition
Vision Research 41:1409–1422. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0042-6989(01)00073-6, PMID: 11322983
Guerguiev J, Lillicrap TP, Richards BA. 2017. Towards deep learning with segregated dendrites eLife 6:e22901.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.22901, PMID: 29205151
Gui J, Sun Z, Wen Y, Tao D, Ye J. 2020. A Review on Generative Adversarial Networks: Algorithms, Theory, and
Applications [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2001.​06937
Guo W, Wang J, Wang S. 2019. Deep multimodal representation learning: A survey IEEE Access 7:63373–63394.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2916887
Ha D, Schmidhuber J. 2018. World models [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1803.​10122

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



25 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Haider P, Ellenberger B, Kriener L, Jordan J, Senn W, Petrovici M. 2021. Latent Equilibrium: Arbitrarily fast
computation with arbitrarily slow neurons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 17839–17851.
Heusel M, Ramsauer H, Unterthiner T, Nessler B, Hochreiter S. 2018. GANs Trained by a Two Time-­Scale Update
Rule Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1706.​08500
Hinton GE, Dayan P, Frey BJ, Neal RM. 1995. The "wake-­sleep" algorithm for unsupervised neural networks
Science (New York, N.Y.) 268:1158–1161. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7761831, PMID: 7761831
Hjelm RD, Fedorov A, Lavoie-­Marchildon S, Grewal K, Bachman P, Trischler A, Bengio Y. 2019. Learning deep
representations by mutual information estimation and maximization [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1808.​06670
Hobson JA, Pace-­Schott EF, Stickgold R. 2000. Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience of
conscious states The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:793–842; . DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/​
s0140525x00003976, PMID: 11515143
Hobson JA. 2009. REM sleep and dreaming: towards a theory of protoconsciousness Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience 10:803–813. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2716, PMID: 19794431
Hobson JA, Hong CCH, Friston KJ. 2014. Virtual reality and consciousness inference in dreaming. Frontiers in
Psychology 5:1133. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01133, PMID: 25346710
Hoel E. 2021. The overfitted brain: Dreams evolved to assist generalization. Patterns (New York, N.Y.) 2:100244.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100244, PMID: 34036289
Huang H, Li Z, He R, Sun Z, Tan T. 2018. Introvae: Introspective variational autoencoders for photographic image
synthesis. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1807.​06358
Hung CP, Kreiman G, Poggio T, DiCarlo JJ. 2005. Fast Readout of Object Identity from Macaque Inferior
Temporal Cortex Science (New York, N.Y.) 310:863–866. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1117593, PMID:
16272124
Ioffe S, Szegedy C. 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate
shift [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1502.​03167
Ji D, Wilson MA. 2007. Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex and hippocampus during sleep Nature
Neuroscience 10:100–107. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1825, PMID: 17173043
Jolliffe IT, Cadima J. 2016. Principal component analysis: a review and recent developments. Philosophical
Transactions. Series A, Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences 374:20150202. DOI: https://doi.org/​
10.1098/rsta.2015.0202, PMID: 26953178
Káli S, Dayan P. 2004. Off-­line replay maintains declarative memories in a model of hippocampal-­neocortical
interactions Nature Neuroscience 7:286–294. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1202, PMID: 14983183
Karras T, Laine S, Aila T. 2018. A Style-­Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks
[arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1812.​04948
Keller GB, Mrsic-­Flogel TD. 2018. Predictive Processing: A Canonical Cortical Computation Neuron 100:424–
435. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.003, PMID: 30359606
Kingma DP, Welling M. 2013. Auto-­encoding variational bayes. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1312.​6114
Kingma DP, Ba J. 2017. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1412.​6980
Klinzing JG, Niethard N, Born J. 2019. Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during sleep Nature
Neuroscience 22:1598–1610. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0467-3, PMID: 31451802
Korcsak-­Gorzo A, Müller MG, Baumbach A, Leng L, Breitwieser OJ, van Albada SJ, Senn W, Meier K,
Legenstein R, Petrovici MA. 2021. Cortical oscillations implement a backbone for sampling-­based computation
in spiking neural networks [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2006.​11099
Krizhevsky A, Hinton G. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. University of Toronto.
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. 2015. Deep learning Nature 521:436–444. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/​
nature14539, PMID: 26017442
Léger D, Debellemaniere E, Rabat A, Bayon V, Benchenane K, Chennaoui M. 2018. Slow-­wave sleep: From the
cell to the clinic Sleep Medicine Reviews 41:113–132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2018.01.008, PMID:
29490885
Lewis PA, Durrant SJ. 2011. Overlapping memory replay during sleep builds cognitive schemata Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 15:343–351. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.06.004, PMID: 21764357
Lewis PA, Knoblich G, Poe G. 2018. How Memory Replay in Sleep Boosts Creative Problem-­Solving Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 22:491–503. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.03.009, PMID: 29776467
Li W, Ma L, Yang G, Gan W-­B. 2017. REM sleep selectively prunes and maintains new synapses in development
and learning Nature Neuroscience 20:427–437. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4479, PMID: 28092659
Lillicrap TP, Santoro A, Marris L, Akerman CJ, Hinton G. 2020. Backpropagation and the brain Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 21:335–346. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0277-3, PMID: 32303713
Lim S, McKee JL, Woloszyn L, Amit Y, Freedman DJ, Sheinberg DL, Brunel N. 2015. Inferring learning rules from
distributions of firing rates Nature Neuroscience 18:1804–1810. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4158, PMID:
26523643
Liu X, Zhang F, Hou Z, Wang Z, Mian L, Zhang J, Tang J. 2021. Self-­supervised Learning: Generative or
Contrastive [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2006.​08218
Llewellyn S. 2015. Dream to Predict? REM Dreaming as Prospective Coding. Frontiers in Psychology 6:1961.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01961, PMID: 26779078
Llewellyn S. 2016. Crossing the invisible line: De-­differentiation of wake, sleep and dreaming may engender
both creative insight and psychopathology. Consciousness and Cognition 46:127–147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
1016/j.concog.2016.09.018, PMID: 27718406

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



26 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Maas AL, Hannun AY, Ng AY. 2013. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models. ICML
Workshop on Deep Learning for Audio, Speech and Language Processing. .
Majaj NJ, Hong H, Solomon EA, DiCarlo JJ. 2015. Simple Learned Weighted Sums of Inferior Temporal Neuronal
Firing Rates Accurately Predict Human Core Object Recognition Performance. The Journal of Neuroscience
35:13402–13418. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5181-14.2015, PMID: 26424887
Mamelak AN, Hobson JA. 1989. Dream Bizarreness as the Cognitive Correlate of Altered Neuronal Behavior in
REM Sleep. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1:201–222. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1989.1.3.201,
PMID: 23968505
Marblestone AH, Wayne G, Kording KP. 2016. Toward an integration of deep learning and neuroscience
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 10:94. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2016.00094
McClelland JL, McNaughton BL, O’Reilly RC. 1995. Why there are complementary learning systems in the
hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and
memory. Psychological Review 102:419–457. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419, PMID:
7624455
McKay BE, Placzek AN, Dani JA. 2007. Regulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity by neuronal nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors Biochemical Pharmacology 74:1120–1133. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2007.07.​
001, PMID: 17689497
Miyato T, Kataoka T, Koyama M, Yoshida Y. 2018. Spectral normalization for generative adversarial networks.
[arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1802.​05957
Munjal P, Paul A, Krishnan NC. 2020. Implicit discriminator in variational autoencoder. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​
abs/​1909.​13062​DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207307
Nadel L, Moscovitch M. 1997. Memory consolidation, retrograde amnesia and the hippocampal complex Current
Opinion in Neurobiology 7:217–227. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/s0959-4388(97)80010-4, PMID: 9142752
Nayebi A, Srivastava S, Ganguli S, Yamins DL. 2020. Identifying Learning Rules From Neural Network
Observables. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2639–2650.
Nelson JP, McCarley RW, Hobson JA. 1983. REM sleep burst neurons, PGO waves, and eye movement
information Journal of Neurophysiology 50:784–797. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1983.50.4.784, PMID:
6631463
Netzer Y, Wang T, Coates A, Bissacco A, Wu B, Ng AY. 2011. Reading Digits in Natural Images with
Unsupervised Feature Learning. NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning 2011.
.
Nir Y, Tononi G. 2010. Dreaming and the brain: from phenomenology to neurophysiology Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 14:88–100. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.12.001, PMID: 20079677
Norman KA, Newman EL, Perotte AJ. 2005. Methods for reducing interference in the Complementary Learning
Systems model: Oscillating inhibition and autonomous memory rehearsal Neural Networks 18:1212–1228. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2005.08.010, PMID: 16260116
O’Neill J, Pleydell-­Bouverie B, Dupret D, Csicsvari J. 2010. Play it again: reactivation of waking experience and
memory Trends in Neurosciences 33:220–229. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2010.01.006, PMID:
20207025
Palmiero M, Nori R, Aloisi V, Ferrara M, Piccardi L. 2015. Domain-­Specificity of Creativity: A Study on the
Relationship Between Visual Creativity and Visual Mental Imagery Frontiers in Psychology 6:1870. DOI: https://​
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01870, PMID: 26648904
Poe GR. 2017. Sleep is for forgetting The Journal of Neuroscience 37:464–473. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/​
JNEUROSCI.0820-16.2017, PMID: 28100731
Pogodin R, Mehta Y, Lillicrap TP, Latham PE. 2021. Towards Biologically Plausible Convolutional Networks [arXiv].
https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2106.​13031
Radford A, Metz L, Chintala S. 2015. Unsupervised Representation Learning with Deep Convolutional Generative
Adversarial Networks [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1511.​06434
Radford A, Kim JW, Hallacy C, Ramesh A, Goh G, Agarwal S, Sastry G, Askell A, Mishkin P, Clark J, Krueger G,
Sutskever I. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​
org/​abs/​2103.​00020
Rao RPN, Ballard DH. 1999. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-­
classical receptive-­field effects Nature Neuroscience 2:79–87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/4580, PMID:
10195184
Rennó-Costa C, da Silva ACC, Blanco W, Ribeiro S. 2019. Computational models of memory consolidation and
long-­term synaptic plasticity during sleep Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 160:32–47. DOI: https://doi.​
org/10.1016/j.nlm.2018.10.003, PMID: 30321652
Richards BA, Lillicrap TP, Beaudoin P, Bengio Y, Bogacz R, Christensen A, Clopath C, Costa RP, de Berker A,
Ganguli S, Gillon CJ, Hafner D, Kepecs A, Kriegeskorte N, Latham P, Lindsay GW, Miller KD, Naud R, Pack CC,
Poirazi P, et al. 2019. A deep learning framework for neuroscience Nature Neuroscience 22:1761–1770. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0520-2, PMID: 31659335
Sacramento J, Ponte Costa R, Bengio Y, Senn W. 2018. Dendritic cortical microcircuits approximate the
backpropagation algorithm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 (NeurIPS 2018). .
Schoenfeld G, Kollmorgen S, Lewis C, Bethge P, Reuss AM, Aguzzi A, Mante V, Helmchen F. 2022. Dendritic
Integration of Sensory and Reward Information Facilitates Learning. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/​
2021.12.28.474360

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



27 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I, Hubert T, Simonyan K, Sifre L, Schmitt S, Guez A, Lockhart E, Hassabis D,
Graepel T, Lillicrap T, Silver D. 2020. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model
Nature 588:604–609. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03051-4, PMID: 33361790
Schwartz S. 2003. Are life episodes replayed during dreaming Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7:325–327. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(03)00162-1, PMID: 12907219
Seibt J, Richard CJ, Sigl-­Glöckner J, Takahashi N, Kaplan DI, Doron G, de Limoges D, Bocklisch C, Larkum ME.
2017. Cortical dendritic activity correlates with spindle-­rich oscillations during sleep in rodents Nature
Communications 8:1–13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00735-w, PMID: 28947770
Senn W, Sacramento J. 2015. Backward reasoning the formation rules Nature Neuroscience 18:1705–1706. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4172, PMID: 26605880
Shorten C, Khoshgoftaar TM. 2019. A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning Journal of Big Data
6:1–48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0
Siegel JM. 2009. Sleep viewed as a state of adaptive inactivity. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 10:747–753. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2697, PMID: 19654581
Silver D, Hasselt H, Hessel M, Schaul T, Guez A, Harley T, Dulac-­Arnold G, Reichert D, Rabinowitz N, Barreto A.
2017. The predictron: End-­to-­end learning and planning. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
3191–3199.
Simons JS, Garrison JR, Johnson MK. 2017. Brain mechanisms of reality monitoring. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
21:462–473. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.03.012, PMID: 28462815
Sjöström PJ, Häusser M. 2006. A Cooperative Switch Determines the Sign of Synaptic Plasticity in Distal
Dendrites of Neocortical Pyramidal Neurons. Neuron 51:227–238. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.​
06.017, PMID: 16846857
Spanò G, Pizzamiglio G, McCormick C, Clark IA, De Felice S, Miller TD, Edgin JO, Rosenthal CR, Maguire EA.
2020. Dreaming with hippocampal damage. eLife 9:e56211. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.56211
Subramaniam K, Luks TL, Fisher M, Simpson GV, Nagarajan S, Vinogradov S. 2012. Computerized Cognitive
Training Restores Neural Activity within the Reality Monitoring Network in Schizophrenia Neuron 73:842–853.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.12.024, PMID: 22365555
Takahashi N, Ebner C, Sigl-­Glöckner J, Moberg S, Nierwetberg S, Larkum ME. 2020. Active dendritic currents
gate descending cortical outputs in perception Nature Neuroscience 23:1277–1285. DOI: https://doi.org/10.​
1038/s41593-020-0677-8, PMID: 32747790
Tang H, Li H, Yan R. 2010. Memory Dynamics in Attractor Networks with Saliency Weights Neural Computation
22:1899–1926. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2010.07-09-1050, PMID: 20235821
Tenenbaum JB, Kemp C, Griffiths TL, Goodman ND. 2011. How to Grow a Mind: Statistics, Structure, and
Abstraction Science (New York, N.Y.) 331:1279–1285. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192788, PMID:
21393536
Tononi G, Cirelli C. 2014. Sleep and the Price of Plasticity: From Synaptic and Cellular Homeostasis to Memory
Consolidation and Integration Neuron 81:12–34. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.025, PMID:
24411729
Tononi G, Cirelli C. 2020. Sleep and synaptic down-­selection The European Journal of Neuroscience 51:413–421.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.14335, PMID: 30614089
Tschannen M, Djolonga J, Rubenstein PK, Gelly S, Lucic M. 2020. On mutual information maximization for
representation learning. [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1907.​13625
Ulyanov D, Vedaldi A, Lempitsky V. 2017. It Takes (Only) Two: Adversarial Generator-­Encoder Networks [arXiv].
https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​1704.​02304
Urbanczik R, Senn W. 2014. Learning by the Dendritic Prediction of Somatic Spiking Neuron 81:521–528. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11.030, PMID: 24507189
van de Ven GM, Siegelmann HT, Tolias AS. 2020. Brain-­inspired replay for continual learning with artificial neural
networks. Nature Communications 11:4069. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17866-2, PMID:
32792531
Voigts J, Harnett MT. 2020. Somatic and Dendritic Encoding of Spatial Variables in Retrosplenial Cortex Differs
during 2D Navigation Neuron 105:237–245. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.10.016, PMID:
31759808
Walker MP. 2009. The Role of Sleep in Cognition and Emotion. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
1156:168–197. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04416.x, PMID: 19338508
Wamsley EJ. 2014. Dreaming and offline memory consolidation. Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports
14:433. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-013-0433-5, PMID: 24477388
Waters F, Blom JD, Dang-­Vu TT, Cheyne AJ, Alderson-­Day B, Woodruff P, Collerton D. 2016. What Is the Link
Between Hallucinations, Dreams, and Hypnagogic-­Hypnopompic Experiences? Schizophrenia Bulletin
42:1098–1109. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbw076, PMID: 27358492
Whittington JCR, Bogacz R. 2019. Theories of Error Back-­Propagation in the Brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
23:235–250. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.005, PMID: 30704969
Wierzynski CM, Lubenov EV, Gu M, Siapas AG. 2009. State-­dependent spike-­timing relationships between
hippocampal and prefrontal circuits during sleep Neuron 61:587–596. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.​
2009.01.011, PMID: 19249278

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



28 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Williams J, Merritt J, Rittenhouse C, Hobson JA. 1992. Bizarreness in dreams and fantasies: Implications for the
activation-­synthesis hypothesis Consciousness and Cognition 1:172–185. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/1053-​
8100(92)90059-J
Winocur G, Moscovitch M, Bontempi B. 2010. Memory formation and long-­term retention in humans and
animals: Convergence towards a transformation account of hippocampal–neocortical interactions
Neuropsychologia 48:2339–2356. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.04.016, PMID:
20430044
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M, O’Donnell J, Christensen DJ, Nicholson C, Iliff JJ,
Takano T, Deane R, Nedergaard M. 2013. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain Science (New
York, N.Y.) 342:373–377. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1241224, PMID: 24136970
Yamins DLK, Hong H, Cadieu CF, Solomon EA, Seibert D, DiCarlo JJ. 2014. Performance-­optimized hierarchical
models predict neural responses in higher visual cortex. PNAS 111:8619–8624. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/​
pnas.1403112111, PMID: 24812127
Yee E, Chrysikou EG, Thompson-­Schill SL. 2013. Semantic Memory. Oxford University Press.
Zbontar J, Jing L, Misra I, LeCun Y, Deny S. 2021. Barlow twins: Self-­supervised learning via redundancy
reduction [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2103.​03230
Zeiler MD, Fergus R. 2013. Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional Networks [arXiv]. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​
1311.​2901
Zhuang C, Yan S, Nayebi A, Schrimpf M, Frank MC, DiCarlo JJ, Yamins DLK. 2021. Unsupervised neural network
models of the ventral visual stream. PNAS 118:e2014196118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2014196118,
PMID: 33431673

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



29 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Appendix 1
Training losses for full and pathological models
In the following, we report the measured losses over training for the various different pathological
conditions. ‍Limg‍and ‍LKL ‍are optimized for each condition and systematically decrease with learning,
while ‍LNREM‍ is significantly reduced in models with NREM (Appendix 1—figure 1, Appendix 1—
figure 2). Its initial increase in the models with REM is explained by its competitive optimization with
the GAN losses. Generator loss ‍Lfake = LREM‍and discriminator loss ‍Lreal + Lfake ‍are only optimized
in models with REM, showing a progressive decrease of the discriminator loss in parallel with an
increase of the generator loss, reflecting adversarial learning between the two streams.



 

 



Appendix 1—figure 1. Training losses for the full and pathological models with the CIFAR-­10 dataset. Evolution
of training losses used to optimize ‍E ‍and ‍G ‍networks (see Materials and methods) over training epochs for the full
and pathological models.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



30 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿



 

 



Appendix 1—figure 2. Training losses for the full and pathological models with the SVHN dataset.

Linear classification performance
We report the mean and SEM of the final linear classification performance (epoch 50) on latent
representations of the PAD and pathological models in Appendix 1—table 1.
Appendix 1—table 1. Final classification performance for the full model and all pathological
conditions for unoccluded images.
Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) over four different initial condition of linear separability
of latent representations at the end of training (epoch 50) for perturbed and adversarial dreaming
(PAD) and its pathological variants.
Dataset

PAD

W/o memory mix

W/o REM

W/o NREM

Wake only

CIFAR-­10

58.25 ± 0.70

53.87 ± 0.85

46.00 ± 0.43

58.00 ± 0.34

42.25 ± 0.54

SVHN

78.92 ± 0.40

60.87 ± 5.07

42.30 ± 1.51

73.25 ± 0.22

41.93 ± 0.65

REM: rapid eye movement; NREM: non-­rapid eye movement.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



31 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Appendix 1—figure 3. Linear classification performance for the full model and all pathological conditions. For
details, see Figure 4.

We also report the linear classification performance for the full and pathological models over
100 epochs. Linear separability for the ‘w/o REM’ (Appendix 1—figure 3c and d, pink curves)
and ‘w/o memory mix’ (Appendix 1—figure 3d, purple curve) conditions does not reach levels
of the full model (Appendix 1—figure 3c and d, black curves) even after many training epochs.
Furthermore, without NREM (Appendix 1—figure 3c and d, ‘w/o NREM’ and ‘Wake only,’ orange
and gray curves), linear separability tends to decrease after many training epochs, suggesting that
NREM helps to stabilize performance with training by preventing overfitting.

Comparison of performance with REM driven by convex combination
or noise
We report the linear classifier performance for PAD using different latent inputs to the generator. In
the main text, we use a convex combination of mixed memories (being a convex combination of two
different replayed latent vectors) and noise sampled from a Gaussian unit distribution (Appendix 1—
figure 4, black). We here show the results when only random Gaussian noise is used (Appendix 1—
figure 4, green) and when only a convex combination of memories is used (Appendix 1—figure
4, red). These different mixing strategies do not show a big difference in linear separability over
training epochs.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



32 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Appendix 1—figure 4. Linear classification performance for different mixing strategies during rapid eye
movement (REM). Linear separability of latent representations with training epochs for perturbed and
adversarial dreaming (PAD) trained with different REM phases: one driven by a convex combination of mixed
memories and noise (black), one by pure noise (green), and one by mixed memories only (red). For details, see
Figure 4.

The order of sleep phases has no influence on the performance of the
linear classifier
To investigate the role of the order of NREM and REM sleep phases, we consider a variation in which
their order is reversed with respect to the model described in the main text. The performance of the
linear classifier is not influenced by this change (Appendix 1—figure 5).

Appendix 1—figure 5. Linear classification performance for different order of sleep phases. Linear separability of
latent representations with training epochs for perturbed and adversarial dreaming (PAD) trained when non-­rapid
eye movement (NREM) precedes rapid eye movement (REM) phase (Wake–NREM–REM, black) or when REM
precedes NREM (Wake–REM–NREM, brown).

Replaying multiple episodic memories during NREM sleep
While in the main text we considered NREM to use only a single episodic memory, here we report
the results for a model in which also NREM uses multiple (here: two) episodic memories. In the
full model (Appendix 1—figure 6, black curves, same data as in Figure 5c and d), NREM uses a
single stored latent representation. Here, we additionally consider an additional model in which
these representations are obtained from a convex combination of mixed memories and spontaneous
cortical activity. The better performance of a single replay suggests that replay from single
episodic memories as postulated to occur during NREM sleep is more efficient to robustify latent
representations against input perturbations.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



33 of 34

Computational and Systems Biology

Research article﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Appendix 1—figure 6. Importance of replaying single hippocampal memories during non-­rapid eye movement
(NREM). Linear separability of latent representations at the end of learning with occlusion intensity for a model
trained with all phases.

Deperrois et al. eLife 2022;0:e76384. DOI: https://​doi.​org/​10.​7554/​eLife.​76384



34 of 34

